The current research was aimed at exploring the meteorological predictors of
storm-related heavy rainage using an organized applied data science framework. The
project was able to develop a scientifically interpretable and computationally sound
understanding of storm formation dynamics through the integration of real world
atmospheric data, statistical analysis, visualization technique, feature selection methods
and machine learning modelling.
The main result of the analysis was that the indicators of atmospheric moisture
have been identified treatment at specific humidity, dew point, and relative humidity as
the most significant predictors of the occurrence of storms. These variables always
showed a strong positive correlation with heavy rainfall events of both filter-based and
wrapper-based feature selection procedures. Surface pressure, in its turn, had a strong
negative correlation that supported the known meteorological principle of storm
systems being closely linked to low-pressure zones, which facilitate the accumulation of
vertical air and the processes of the condensation of the air.
The modeling step also emphasized the necessity of making suitable choices of
assessment measures in the case of unbalanced environmental data. Even the highest
overall accuracy of all the classification models was not found to be satisfactory to
determine the potential ability in practice. Ensemble-oriented procedures, specifically
the Random Forest classifier, were found to perform better in balancing between the
storm detection performance and prediction accuracy in terms of high F1-Score and
ROC-AUC values. The observation indicates that ensemble learning methods are
effective in modelling non-linear interactions in the atmosphere.
  In addition to predictive performance, the research was focused on
interpretability and correspondence to physical atmosphere processes, such that
analytical results were not just statistical contrivances but significant expressions of
storm processes. The visualization-based exploratory analysis further enhanced the
generation of insights that indicated seasonal patterns, extreme rainfall peaks, and
moisture-pressure interactions that are typical of cyclone-prone coastal settings.
Finally, the project shows that the application of data science methodologies can
be used to complement traditional meteorological analysis through a quantitative
verification of the drivers of storm formation and data predictive frameworks. The
knowledge created can be used in better climate risk analysis, preparedness to disasters,
and future studies on more advanced modeling tools or imbalance management
approaches. On the whole, the research provides a detailed analytical platform on how
heavy precipitations can be analyzed and predicted in risky areas.
